Once around the Ashton
meteorite. Ashton is on the border of
Cambridge and Essex in the UK. Sleepy
little village by comparison with many
places even today as a few views of the
uh lovely place there with Ashton Hall
Farm on the left and a view down the
footpath which will become important
later on in the story.
So back in March of 1923, so just over a
hundred years ago, Frederick Pratt, who
was a Thatcher, aged 36, was working
away at Ashton Hall farm out in a wheat
field. Now, we're not entirely sure uh
what he was doing. He could have been uh
cutting hedges. He could have been doing
all sorts of things. Nobody really
knows. It's not documented. But at 1:00,
so I imagine he was probably having his
lunch, he heard a sitting sound, as he
described it, overhead. I thought
perhaps initially it was an aircraft,
but the noise sounded more like a
projectile, an artillery shell going
over. Um, and then just 30 yards away
from him, he saw something hit the
ground and a spray of soil fly up into
the air like a jet of water, he said.
Three days later, he returned to the
site with a shovel and his friend, and
they were able to dig up what is now
called the Ashton
meteorite. Pratt was able to chip a
piece off it with his digging equipment
and check what it was made of just to
make sure that this rock they dug up
wasn't just a random piece of flint uh
from the chalky landscape but was
something very different indeed. And
clearly it was. So he decided he better
do something with it. And what he
decided to do was to take it to the
local police station. And the police
didn't care. They were not interested in
some strange man bringing them a small
rock. So he took it home. But then very
wisely he showed it to the local vicar,
Reverend Francis Bry. Now Barry was ex
Trinity College Cambridge very well
educated and recognized the importance
of what uh Pratt was saying not only the
look of the rock but also the
description of how he'd found it um and
observed the fall and observed falls of
meteorites are very rare indeed. So
Barry bought it. we don't know how much
money changed hands and then donated the
thing to what is now the natural history
museum the minor minological department
of the British museum as it was then
known and the man he gave it to was this
guy George T Prior doctor keeper of
minology and meteorite expert renowned
across the UK at the time and he uh did
some work on the object concluded it
really was a meteorite very fascinating
object and decided he'd better pay a
visit. So he came up to Ashton with
Pratt and the Reverend Bry. They then
visited the site and were able to find
the smaller fragment that Pratt had
knocked off whilst attempting to
ascertain whether it was just an
ordinary rock or not.
Now, today, the remains of the Ashton
meteorite are held in the Natural
History Museum. Here's our scientist
wearing gloves, of course, because you
don't really want to let the acid from
your fingers get into these rather rare
objects. And uh you can see the chipped
face where the fragment was cut off
where Pratt hit it with a shovel to
determine that it wasn't an ordinary
flint. And inside it, you can see some
of the structure of the uh round grains
and so forth inside the rock just in
that
photograph. Now, they've got the main
piece, but there are a number of
replicas around. In fact, there are
three painted plaster casts. one in the
Saffron Walden Museum, one in the Ashton
Museum, and one at the Essex Field
Center uh at what Tyler Country Park at
Pity. And so these are very very
realistic painted to look like the real
thing. And they show all the same
surface details of course being plaster
casts. So uh it gives you a good sense
of what the object was really like. And
the surface shows the signs of the
passage through the atmosphere coming in
at high speed 12 kilometers per second.
That's 8 miles per second roughly.
That's very fast indeed for much faster
than a rifle bullet. Then while still in
the high atmosphere, 300,000 ft, 100,000
mters, it would have glowed like a
fireball, creating this enormously
bright streak in the sky, ionizing the
air, leaving a trail behind it. And uh
that heat would have melted the surface
creating this black fusion crust as it's
called sort of glassy crust over the
surface around about a millimeter deep
at its thickest part. And you can see
the way that the leading edge bore the
brunt of the uh passage through the
atmosphere and was most strongly melted
and then molten glassy materials were
then stre back across the surface to
make what's called flow ridges very
characteristic of a stony meteorite like
this
one. Now it uh would have been slowed
down high up in the atmosphere still. So
by the time it was down to about 100,000
ft, this would be moving at no more than
a few hundred miles an hour terminal
velocity for the altitude and would have
fallen through the cold air and down
onto the
ground maybe at 250 m an hour. Still
fast enough to be a problem if it came
and hit you. Um and indeed to bury
itself in the ground in the earth of the
wheat field.
Now, at the time of the fall, the
surface would have still been warm for a
few minutes, but the interior of the
meteorite would have still been at the
temperature of deep space because it
really did not have time for that
surface heating to penetrate into the
interior. And that would have been at
about minus 250 degrees. And so, very
rapidly the heat would be lost. And uh
actually you would feel this as cold if
you picked it up after a couple of
minutes after it had hit the
ground. So the meteorite was then
analyzed 6 by 9 by 12 cm weighing 1.3 g
uh sorry 1.3 kg originally but of course
Pratt had chipped a fragment off and
another piece had gone for analysis. So
there's just 1.27 27 kilograms in the
main fragment now. And looking deep
inside it with a microraph here, you can
see the felspar, the pyroine, and of
course the greenish yellow olivine
crystals. There are specs of nickel iron
metal alloy and condrils indicating that
these are original beads from the early
solar nebula.
And overall it's been classified as an
L6 condrite. Condrite because of the
condrs being present. And L6 tells you
something about the type of
meteorite. So the main classes of these
condrite meteorites. L means low iron,
so less than 10%. And most of these seem
to be from one
particular enormous impact event around
about 468 to 470 million years ago out
in the asteroid belt. So in the mid
orovvician
era either the parent body of the entire
flora family or the uh asteroids os or
and flora or something to do with that
entire group of asteroids created these
elondrite fragments that all then came
as a shower to earth and actually
466 million years ago. So just 2 million
years after creation, they fell to Earth
um over a fairly long period of time and
created a considerably uh nasty
extinction of life on Earth uh blotting
out many many families and species of
creatures. the LL condrites. LL means
low low, not very imaginative, but it
means there's very low iron um in these.
These are much rarer. Uh Chelabinsk was
an example, as is the asteroid Ittogawa,
which we have samples of after a sample
return mission as well. And then you
have the other end of things, the
Hondrites, H for high, so 20 25% iron.
And these are uh the most common type
and we think that these have an
association again with a cosmic train
wreck involving either the asteroid he
Juno or Iris or possibly all three of
them um out there in the asteroid belt.
So many of these types have been blasted
off the surface or are the result of
completely destructive events that
created these families of asteroids out
there. So that's the letter. So we have
an L condrite. In this case, it's
L6. And the numbers run from 1 to six.
And they tell you how much the material
has undergone metamorphosis. How much
recristallization due to the pressure
and temperature deep inside a larger
body
um has altered the material. And so L6
is the most altered. and therefore from
the deeper layers inside a fairly
substantial body. So again backing up
the idea that there was a parent body
that was shattered and that uh many of
these L condrites come from different
layers within that body and this came
from one of the deeper layers of the uh
rocky part of the body itself um and
probably uh was part of that enormous
impact maybe 470 million years ago.
There are also signs of alteration by
water. So perhaps initially as ice, the
heat generated by radioactivity within
the parent body very early on in the
highly radioactive environment of the
early solar system would have been able
to melt that ice and then the water
interact in various aquifer pockets
within the body itself.
and hydrate the minerals of
the composition of the rock. And such
hydrated asteroids impacting the Earth
may have accounted for the later
delivery of a lot of the water that goes
to make up the Earth's oceans. So this
meteorite um falling in a wheat field
picked up by Fred Pratt um was really
very very scientifically informative.
Now a 100red years after the event was
discovered in the first place and Pratt
saw what he saw. So
2023 the rock was allowed to return to
Ashton for the day. And here we've got
two of the local geologists and
scientists there holding the fragment
for this uh centenerary celebration. and
plans were put in place and a marker was
erected, a wooden post labeled up with
the impact site just where this came
down. And this was unveiled on the 100th
anniversary of the event
itself. Where is it? Well, it's just
next to that path. You can actually walk
down that footpath that I had in the
first slide marked on the map there. So
you can visit Ashton, go down through
Church End, find the footpath, walk
along it, and just where it turns to a
right angle near Little Hazewood, that's
where the post is. And you can go and
inspect the site if you really want to.
Um, that's the sort of crazy thing I
might try and do.
And just to finish up then, we've got
the Ashton meteorite marked on our map
over not the one at the extreme right,
but the one nearly rightmost in the uh
middle just north of London there.
That's the Ashton 1923 event and some of
the others. And roughly we get about one
every 10 years meteorite falls over the
UK. But this one was very special
because it was a witnessed fall. Fred
actually saw it come down and that does
not happen very often at all. If you
want to read more about it, the Saffron
Walden Museum has this book, The Ashton
Meteorite. It costs 3, I think, so it's
very cheap, uh, by Gerald Lucy and Mike
Howrett, 24 pages, and talks in a little
bit more detail about some of what went
on. Anyway, I hope you enjoyed that
little tour of this fascinating
witnessed fall. Thanks very much for
listening.